
------------------------------------------
Verification Conditions
------------------------------------------

The code for this is contained within the files vcgen.sml and conditions.sml.
It also makes use of Z3, which can be found in the externals directory. The
purpose of VC is to statically verify contracts and other assumptions made
in code (like indices are within bounds of an array, no division by 0, etc.).
Not only does it check if the code explicitly breaks one of these assumptions
(like explicitly dividing by zero), but it also checks if the code could
potentially break one of these assumptions (for example, by dividing by a
function argument that wasn't required to be nonzero). This is done by using
the SAT-solving capabilities of Z3, which asserts statements about the code
and sees if there is a conflict. In vcrules.tex, the various assumptions are
described, with differentiation between warnings and errors, where a warning
is something that could potentially be wrong (i.e. is SAT-solvable), while
an error is something that always holds to be true (i.e. is explicitly invalid
in the code).

The file vcgen.sml does the work of processing the code, which is in SSA form
and has been run through isolation (to make things like array access on the
top level for easier checking). While going through the code, certain
expressions are asserted based on the assumptions derived from the code, as
mentioned above. To assert something, it makes a call to the assert function
in conditions.sml, which interfaces with Z3. When given an expression to
assert, it is translated into code that Z3 understands, and sent to Z3 to
process. If it can satisfy the assertions that it has made so far, then it
returns with true, otherwise it returns false. This result is then used by
vcgen to generate error messages, if warranted by the result of the call to Z3.

Currently, VC is only implemented for straightline code in C0, and will not
work on code with conditionals or loops. However, as outlined in vcrules, most
of what is required for these features have been worked out, and they just need
to be implemented. The current code does check for division errors, as well as
out of bounds array accesses (which it does by keeping track of array lengths).
It also checks to make sure that the ensures statements are valid for each
possible return expression. Another future addition would be using requires and
ensures contracts to make assertions about function calls and verify that they
are made correctly.
